week eight notes

The Apparatus of Digital Archaeology
https://intarch.ac.uk/journal/issue44/7/index.html

    Digital Archaeology is predicated upon an ever-changing set of apparatuses – technological, methodological, software, hardware, material, immaterial – which in their own ways and to varying degrees shape the nature of Digital Archaeology. Our attention, however, is perhaps inevitably more closely focused on research questions, choice of data, and the kinds of analyses and outputs. 
    It argues that a critical appreciation of our computational cognitive artefacts is key to understanding their effects on both our own cognition and on the creation of archaeological knowledge. 
    1.
    ***Although it is increasingly recognised that the tools we use to examine our objects of study change our relationship to them, this is not an area that has been studied in any great detail within Digital Archaeology beyond perhaps discussions of the effects of different categories of software (the impact of GIS or database applications, for instance, or the effect of enlarged access to open data sources) on how we organise and understand the past.***
    The fact that archaeologists have been largely content to benefit from the application and contribution of these digital tools and have not paid a great deal of attention to these questions is far from unique. For example, until recently most philosophers of science focused on the theories surrounding scientific knowledge rather than the instruments that were employed in laboratories or elsewhere (for example, Bunge 2010, 85).
    He [Ian Hodder] adds that there is also knowledge incorporated within the object itself, in the form of knowledge about measurement procedures, physical properties and so on. 
    some philosophers of science – and indeed, Hodder himself – would argue that knowledge is encapsulated in even the most basic artefact. Hence, for example, the archaeological trowel contains knowledge in the form of its design, the relationship between handle and blade, etc. (albeit characteristics determined by a different domain), and through its application it reveals knowledge of archaeological value. 
    2.
    'cognitive artefacts': human-made physical objects that we employ as a means of assisting us in performing a cognitive task, and which are able to represent, store, retrieve, and manipulate information (e.g. Norman 1992; 1993).
    These cognitive artefacts support us in performing tasks that otherwise at best we would have to conduct using more laborious and time-consuming methods (film photography or measured survey using tapes, for instance) or that we would not be able to undertake (we cannot physically see beneath the ground, or determine the chemical constituents of an object, for example).
    most if not all of the cognitive artefacts used in archaeology are designed outside their discipline of application, meaning we have little or no control over their development and manufacture, and hence their internal modes of operation have to be taken at face value.
    'Cognitive artifacts are … important to study, not only because they make us more powerful and versatile thinkers, but also because they shape and transform our cognitive system and cognitive practices' (Heersmink 2013, 466).
    3.
    ***Cognitive artefacts may be seen in terms of functioning in a similar fashion to the equivalent human cognitive process. This is the basis for seeing computer reasoning as a model of the human mind, for instance. Clark and Chalmers (1998) argued that a proportion of a cognitive task could be conducted outside the human mind through linking the human agent in a two-way interaction with an external entity to create a coupled cognitive system. This external cognitive process is seen as an extension of the human mind through what Clark subsequently defined as the parity principle (2005, 2). This considers that if a function undertaken by an external device would be considered to be cognitive if performed by the human mind, then that device is functionally part of that extended cognitive process;***
    Cognitive artefacts may be seen as such prosthetic devices that act back on their human makers and users (see Malafouris 2013, 154). Indeed, the ways in which humans and things interact with each other, act on each other, is fundamental to archaeological concepts of agency (for example, Dobres and Robb 2005; Gosden 2005), although the degree and nature of this is open to question (for example, Ingold 2011, 89ff; 2013, 91ff; Barrett 2014).
    '… external states and processes need not mimic or replicate the formats, dynamics, or functions of inner states and processes. Rather, different components of the overall (enduring or temporary) system can play quite different roles and have different properties while coupling in collective and complementary contributions to flexible thinking and acting.' (Sutton 2010, 194).
    This introduces an essentially asymmetric relationship between human agent and thing rather than the broadly symmetric interaction implicit in the parity principle. In some respects, this might appear to be akin to the distinction between 'primary agency' and 'secondary agency' (for example, Gell 1998, 21) in which, unlike humans, things do not have agency in themselves but have agency given or ascribed to them. 
    4.
    Heersmink (2012; 2015), following the complementarity principle, defines what he calls the dimensions of integration between embodied agents (humans) and cognitive artefacts that can be employed in examining these relationships. Heersmink argues that these should be seen as a multidimensional phenomenon with none prioritised above another. In no particular order, therefore, Heersmink defines these dimensions as:[1. information flow, 2. reliability of access, 3. durability, 4. trust, 5. procedural transparency, 6. informational (or representational) transparency, 7. individualization, 8. transformation]
    6.
    Baird (2004) has previously undertaken multiple historiographical studies of scientific instruments ranging from Faraday's electric motor to the self-calibrating spectrometer and the cyclotron, and on the basis of which he has argued that each instrument embodies what he calls 'thing knowledge'. This manifests itself in different ways, but essentially an instrument is seen to encapsulate knowledge and theory about the world independent of its users, who are distanced from the design and creation of the artefact. Baird argues that scientific instruments should be seen as a kind of objective knowledge in that, for instance, their actions provide measurements that are not directly influenced by human judgement (for example, Baird 2004, 120). 
    Similarly, their embedded knowledge is not strictly independent of their human originators, although this is becoming less true of devices employing neural networks and other means of deep-learning. In short, the human element in the creation and construction of knowledge remains fundamental, but today it is ever more scaffolded upon the knowledge and know-how embedded in cognitive artefacts. Furthermore, this 'thing knowledge' is increasingly compounded and reliant upon the knowledge of other 'things'. 
    7.
    Indeed, we might anticipate computers and their software scoring the highest across the board in terms of these cognitive dimensions since they are highly malleable and flexible. 
    Striphas (2015), for example, has argued that our reliance on algorithms constitutes what he calls an 'algorithmic culture', while Bogost (2015) goes further and suggests that we live not so much in an algorithmic culture as a 'computational theocracy' with the invisibility of algorithms giving them a transcendental, almost divine character. In the process, algorithms can become mythologised:'On the one hand, they have been depicted as powerful entities that rule, sort, govern, shape, or otherwise control our lives. On the other hand, their alleged obscurity and inscrutability make it difficult to understand what exactly is at stake.' (Ziewitz 2016, 3).
    Our application of a computer is therefore effectively a collaborative venture, whether we realise it or not, combining human and algorithmic agency in a complex web of interrelationships that remain largely unseen and seemingly impenetrable. Our use of these tools is ultimately mediated by the actions and decisions of those who designed and created them - and may well have done so without our mode of use specifically in mind. 
    What do we, as end-users, need to know about in our use of these tools? What should we understand? What can we reasonably understand? How much do we need to know about the ordering principles and bases of the tools we use (Hamilton et al. 2014)? 
    In fact, it is becoming the case that even programmers themselves do not always understand what the software system is actually doing: for instance, Google's DeepMind software extends its own neural network by teaching itself, creating a computationally incomprehensible black box. 
    8.
    Four distinct approaches may be characterised to this end [opening the black box]: a critical reading of the program code/algorithm itself, a critical appreciation of the software package, a critical engagement with the creative process of the design of software, algorithms, and other structuring aspects of the computational environment, and a critical understanding of the use of the hardware/software applied within an archaeological context. 
    8.1
    'The tools we use have a profound (and devious!) influence on our thinking habits, and, therefore, on our thinking abilities.' (Dijkstra 1982, 129).
    '… certain techniques imported from the computer sciences may never be understood in the same way we understand statistical concepts like variance or regression because there no longer is a 'manual' equivalent of the automated approach.' (Rieder and Röhle 2012, 76). 
    8.3
    A drawback with considering code and/or software as cognitive compactants is that they represent the end of a design and development process – the code is constructed and shaped to create the software that is subsequently selected and applied within an analysis. A more complete approach to understanding a cognitive artefact in this situation would be to engage with the initial design and development process as a means of appreciating the series of debates, decisions and compromises surrounding its production in advance of its application.
    So even if the creative processes behind the construction and manufacture of the cognitive artefact are not available for inspection, ancillary acts of creation prior to its implementation and use in a specific context may well be.
    Although considering the computer as a digital cognitive artefact highlights these challenges, they are equally true of other digital artefacts – even a device as comparatively straightforward as a total station or a digital camera relies for its operation on algorithms that for the most part we cannot access. 

Living a Semi-digital Kinda Life’ in Erin Walcek Averett, Jody Michael Gordon, and Derek B. Counts (eds) Mobilizing the Past for a Digital Future: The Potential of Digital Archaeology

    In  this particular moment, as a discipline, I believe we live a semi-digital kinda life (à la Third Eye Blind, the US rock band formed in the early 1990s ) where we are part paper and part paperless.
    Technological advances make it easier  and  faster  to  record  sites  on  a  daily  basis,  to  uncover  features  from the air (see Wernke et al., Ch. 2.3) and from the sea bed (Buxton et al., Ch. 2.4), and to replicate artifacts and sites (Dufton, Ch. 3.3; Olson, Ch.  2.2),  thus  freeing  up  time  for  greater  reflection  and  discussion  about  the  research  goals  and  outcomes.  Does  this  lead  to  more  time  for  contemplation?  Caraher  (2015)  suggests  that  with  increased  effi-ciency comes the increased temptation to dig more, which authors in this volume confirm. Dufton (Ch. 3.3) and Fee (Ch. 2.1) admit that the extra time garnered as a result of digital technologies did not always occasion further site/object contemplation but instead often brought about  additional  excavation  and  even  larger  amounts  of  amassed  data.  What  are  we  doing  with  all  of  the  data  collected  as  a  result  of  the digital revolution—are we publishing more? 
    do additional data result in better archae-ology  or  just  a  different  type  of  archaeology?  Are  we  now  freer  as  a  discipline,  or  is  there  a  greater  entanglement  with  data  and  site  that  requires  even  more  reflexive  examination?  Are  we  thinking  more  or  just inputting and gathering more data?
    We  are carrying out more comprehensive archaeology (or what Olson and colleagues  (2013)  labeled  “total  archaeology”)  and  leading  a  digital  life,  but  I  worry  that  in  our  preoccupation  with  a  paperless  life  we  might overlook the legacy of paper and a closer connection to the site. 
    I  am  uneasy  about  an  overreliance  on  the  technological,  what  some  have  identified  as  a  type  of  fetishism  (Huggett  2016).  
    Whatever the method used for data collection, we are always missing things and we need  to  acknowledge  this  rather  than  promoting  technology  as  the  liberator of all of our past paper-based wrongs. 
    The  removal  of  the  time-consuming  illustration  process  from  excavation work does not necessarily guarantee the de-skilling of the excavator, but it certainly transforms a crucial step in the documentation process from one requiring detailed and careful knowledge both of the features in a trench and the conventions of  illustration  to  one  requiring  the  understanding  of  a  digital  camera and relevant software. The former is vital to the archae-ological process whereas the latter is not. (Caraher (Ch. 4.1: 436))
    In  a  reflective  blogpost  on  detoxing  from  the  digital,  Jeremy  Huggett  (2016)  asserts  that  “Digital  Archaeology  should  be  a  means  of rethinking archaeology, rather than simply a series of methodolo-gies and techniques” – digital archaeology should be about more than the  tools  and  techniques.  
    This  inequality,  I  would  argue,  reinforces  the  colonial  binary of the wealthy West versus the less-developed places in which many of us work. Do we have to go big or go home? And what if we are home but have no access to resources? Are we then forced to partner with wealthy institutions/individuals (in or out of country) in order to be digital archaeologists?
    Bardolph  argues that the low rates of publication perpetuate a marginalization of  female  researchers  in  academia  and  demonstrate  what  she  called  “a  pernicious  historical  bias  with  regards  to  the  visibility,  recogni-tion,  presentation  and  circulation  of  women’s  writing”  (Bardolph  2014: 534). 
    In  no  way  am  I suggesting that particular archaeologists are deliberately excluding women and/or minorities; I think the historical legacy of archaeology and  science  in  general  as  a  male-dominated  field  has  resulted  in  the  present situation, but I want those who embrace of the digital revolu-tion to recognize that these historical precedents may be reinforced by current practices. 
    As Kansa (Ch. 4.2) eloquently states, traditionally varied funding mechanisms have cultivated this partition by continuing to sponsor fieldwork, new tech-nologies, and analyses but by not providing much, if any, support for publication. This divide between fieldwork and publication has led to a discouraging predicament: the ongoing failure to publish the results of our research in a timely and accessible manner. If we are producing more data, faster, we should also be thinking about sharing our find-ings  in  a  greater  number  of  appropriate  venues.  After  all,  is  not  the  raison d’être of archaeology knowledge production and its dissemina-tion? 
        -commodification of archaeological data?
    Requiring  data  management  as  part  of  funding  is  an  excellent  first  step  in  meeting  our  ethical  obligation  to  publish  our  findings.  We  still  need  to  intellectually  engage  with,  scrutinize,  interrogate,  inspect,  synthesize,  and  narrate  the  data  we  deposit;  but  at  the  very  least, web-based digital repositories should be a part of our digital (or semi-digital) lives. 
    In this digital moment, the 3D model of the arch from Palmyra was used to  demonstrate  that  the  West  cares  about  culture—a  media  moment  timed  to  coincide  with  World  Heritage  Day.  But  the  moment  could  have been so much more: the 3D arch could have served as proxy for future  collaborations  with  the  people  of  Syria  on  the  protection  and  conservation of their cultural heritage. 
    After  reading  this  volume,  I  am  convinced  that  digital  technologies  have  the  propensity  to  create  and/or  reinforce  divisions  between  males  and  females,  developed  and  less-developed  nations, and practice and theory. As a discipline we need to acknowl-edge  these  ruptures  and  work  toward  bridging  the  divides.  Digital  archaeology  appears  to  be  largely  uncritical  in  execution,  with  a  focus  on  equipment,  platforms,  and  programs.  Evaluation  has  been  limited to debates over DIY versus professional, issues over standard-ization, and sometimes about output. This lack of self-assessment has left  “archaeologists  open  to  accusations  of  technological  fetishism”  (Huggett 2016, and see Tweet #5 above). While these same statements can be and have been leveled at paper-based archaeology, I was asked to provide my thoughts on the digital.
    I think now is the time to step back, to consider the “slow archaeology” of Caraher (Ch. 4.1) and contemplate our ethical obliga-tions to publish (Kansa, Ch. 4.2); we must also take heed of the ethical responsibilities we have toward the communities with whom we work (Sayre,  Ch.  1.6).  

week 5 feedback

Nice to see the reflection on how the abstraction from the physical world into the digital necessarily relies on the deletion/simplification of information. That’s an important thought to hold onto as we go further into the course. Do you see any potential for when the act of *encoding* might elaborate or enrichen the material? Good to see you tying your observation into what you might do to improve the recording schema. On the subject of archaeological photography though, you might look into the work of Colleen Morgan (York, UK) on photography, and how even seemingly straightforward photographs can embody particular theoretical mindsets… so even photos won’t save us from ourselves...

week 6 feedback

Great choice of quote. Really appreciated your thoughts about the importance of understanding how archaeology works in the private sector, as well as the role of funding, and how this relates back to ‘science.’ Your suggestion of incorporating more information regarding the basic processes of how archaeology works into the course makes a lot of sense, and I can absolutely see how that would make you more comfortable with forming opinions. Additionally, your analysis of the topic models was good; it would be interesting to see what would surface if the largest bins were broken down even further.

week 7 feedback

I always find it v interesting the elements of the readings that people light upon.  I like that you connect with the ‘artistic’ side of digital archaeology. Do you see any ways in which ‘tuning’ an ABM or gpt-2 might fall under that rubric? When we build simulations of the past, we have to record in our notes what we expect to find (based on our experience, our understanding of the phenomena) before running the simulation, to compare with what emerges from the simulation; this guards against making just-so stories to justify what emerges after the fact - we use simulations to explore the space between our expectations and the emergent outcomes. The virus model is archaeologically useful because there are many things that we might try to model as a ‘virus’, mimetically, as you note viz. Reformation. Indeed, my first published article used a virus-on-a-network architecture to explore ideas of ‘Romanization’

Apologies for taking this long on the feedback; spent most of my work hours prepping for / being at a conference. This’ll be taken into account re consolidation II doc, so no worries on that issue.
